>> Get closer because
we're outdoors,
I have to project a lot, and
we're going to become fast
friends today.
Thank you so much for coming.
First of all, my name is Sergei.
I've been studying plants
for a very long time.
And that's kind of what makes
me credible to talk about this.
I'm not a botanist.
I don't claim to be.
I've just been doing
it a really long time.
My family threw me into this is
the short version of the story.
When I was just 13
years old, my mom
decided to hike from Mexico
to Canada on the Pacific Crest
Trail.
And we had no business hiking.
We'd never hiked more
than a day before.
They took me to a
Play It Again store,
invested what
little money we had
into really crappy backpacks.
And then mid-April
in 1998, we had
a friend drop us off on the
Mexican border to start hiking.
As an adult, I realize
how crazy this is.
But when I was a kid, I
was, like, oh, I guess
everybody's family does this.
OK.
When you hike that
far, you obviously
can't pack all the food
on your back, right?
So you have to make
arrangements beforehand
to pack parcels of food
that you ship to yourself.
And then every time you pass
a little town, you resupply.
Again, we had no
experience hiking.
We sort of started
guessing, well,
how much food could five hungry
hikers really eat in a week?
Because the resupply points
were about a week apart.
And I said five, so it was my
mom, my dad, my sister, me,
and then my cousin from Russia
who came to visit us for a year
because my uncle wanted her to
get a full, rounded experience,
right?
So for six months of that year,
we took her into the woods
to give her the
American experience.
But that's a different story.
We get on the trail, and
within a few short days,
we understand that our
calculations were off.
We just sort of figured, oh, how
many dates can you really eat?
We allotted five dates
per person per day,
small bottle of olive oil.
We were also raw food
vegans at the time,
so we had a lot to think about.
A week into the trip, we
started running out of food.
So we have two more days left to
hike, and yet our food is gone.
How many people
have tried fasting
before, by a show
of hands, anybody?
It's not very fun, right?
You always think about food.
Now imagine fasting when you're
expending 4,000 calories a day.
Even less fun.
So we had a little
family meeting.
We had to either decide
whether we quit the trail
and stop doing
this, or improvise.
And my mom's all
about improvisation,
so she got some input.
We, the kids, were
like, well, let's quit.
My mom's like, yeah,
let's not quit.
We picked up a little
book on wild edibles,
and we started just learning
about different plants.
That was one of our little
solutions that we came up with.
That first week
was really scary.
And slowly, we started
learning new plants.
We used to test all
plants on my father
because he didn't speak
English, and so my mom said
that if we lost him,
it wouldn't be as
big of an impact on the family.
That's Russian black humor.
Long story short,
we successfully
completed the trail.
At a certain point, we were
eating 60% to 70% wild edibles
by volume.
So we were able to stretch
the food parcels that we
prepackaged and just
put a bunch of wild food
in them, fill them up.
And so from a very early age,
I got to see that it's doable,
it's realistic.
Just like any new skill,
it's hard at first,
but you perpetually get better.
And so today is going
to be about perpetually
getting better.
One of the things I
really hope to accomplish
is that through
repetition, we're
just going to learn at
least three new plants.
And that's my goal for
today, that each one of you
walks away knowing how to
identify at least three plants.
If you learn 10, great.
But let's keep the bar low
because my motto is always
keep it simple, stupid.
Let's do 10 minutes
of theory because I
think that's important
in the parking lot.
And then the second part,
we'll go into the park,
to Jefferson Park
right over there,
and we're just going to do
hands-on looking at plants,
studying them, talking about
how you would eat them.
I propose that today, we're
not going to eat anything--
in fact, maybe we can
make that agreement--
simply because I've been
here for about a month,
exploring, and it's
not the cleanest park.
So in the interest of
keeping everybody safe,
let's just look at plants,
let's talk about them,
sniff them, but let's not
put them in our mouth.
Sound good?
Promise?
Pinky promise?
OK.
And the reason for
that is because outside
of there being plants
that you shouldn't eat,
human pollutants are actually
almost as big of a concern,
in fact, maybe more so--
pesticides, herbicides, various
chemicals, railroad ties.
That's something we're
going to talk about as well.
So why is it important
to learn about plants?
The main reason is because
it enriches our life.
It teaches us about
our environment.
And actually, that I recently
learned from Expand Yoga
because I started coming
here and doing more yoga.
And I know there's a whole
list of various benefits,
like, you get more limber,
and psychologically, you rest.
But also, I realized
that yoga teaches you
about your immediate
surroundings, right?
So when Liz and Matt tell
us to get in Warrior II,
if you've never done
Warrior II before,
now you know you
can do Warrior II.
And then they say, well, reach
around and clasp your hands
behind your back.
And you're like, holy moly, I
didn't know I could do that.
Now I have that as a skill.
It's in my repertoire.
So you've just
expanded your life
because now you know you
could squat down like this.
And if you ever needed to,
you could do it, right?
In that same sense,
plants do the same thing.
You go to the park, and
you're completely novice,
and it just looks like greenery.
You have no idea what it is.
Then you start crouching down,
you start slowly examining
every tiny little
morsel, every plant,
and your world gets
so much bigger.
You think the world is
huge because there's
seven continents, and
you can fly for 11 hours
and end up in
Russia or wherever.
How much bigger
is the world when
you start looking at all
the little microcosms?
So to me, one of the biggest
benefits of wild edibles
is that it literally enriches
your life and makes it bigger.
And how fortuitous that Expand
Yoga is sponsoring this?
It's like a symbiotic
relationship, almost.
Let's figure out if our
worlds need expanding.
I made some handouts.
Take one, pass it around.
I'm going to quiz you.
Remember college, anybody?
Pop quiz.
This right here is a
test that I came up with.
It's in my book.
I have a wild edibles book.
Shameless plug.
I have a couple copies that
will be for sale afterwards.
This is a test that's
going to help us figure out
how much we know about the
natural world versus how
much we know about the
technological modern world.
So when everybody gets it,
we're going to take it together.
I made this in 2012, so
some of the brand names
are now becoming obsolete.
But let's start from
the left, the top left,
and let's just shout it out.
What's that first T?
>> Twitter.
No cheating, by the way.
No looking at the bottom.
How about the next one?
>> Facebook.
>> Next one?
This is where
everybody gets stumped.
>> Myspace.
>> Oh.
>> How about the check mark?
>> Nike.
>> Next one?
>> Apple.
>> McDonald's.
Mercedes.
>> Lacoste.
A French tennis brand, right?
Now it gets harder.
Now let's look at the
names of the plants.
What's A?
>> Oak.
Oh, I'm impressed.
How about the next one?
>> Fir.
>> Fir, I like fir.
C?
>> Clover.
>> Sorrel.
>> How many people say clover?
Raise your hand nice and high.
How many people say sorrel?
It's sorrel.
Good job.
All right, D.
>> Maple.
>> Not maple.
Grape.
E.
>> I say maple.
>> Maple.
>> Maple seed pod or helicopter.
Right.
F?
>> A Douglas fir cone.
>> Douglas fir cone.
See how the voices
are kind of getting--
>> Yeah.
>> OK, G?
>> Christmas tree.
[LAUGHTER]
>> I like it.
Christmas tree.
What type of Christmas tree?
>> Is it a fir?
>> It's a fir.
Yes, so fir tree.
H?
>> Aspen.
>> Watercress.
Good.
And I?
>> That's a maple.
>> Maple.
OK, so you guys did
better than most,
but we could still expand
our world a little bit more.
The second handout is what
I call Sergei's Wild Edibles
Cheat Sheet.
So it's basically a
little printout I made.
It's a PDF.
And on the front, it has
nine of my favorite plants.
And on the back, it has some
nutritional data and stuff.
And so I'm going to give
you the paper version which
you can laminate,
or you could use it
and love it on
this hike, and then
if you want to laminate it
later-- because I laminated
this for Liz and Matt.
There you go.
Present.
>> Thank you.
>> You can go to my
website, which is on here,
print this off for free.
Take it to the print
shop, get it laminated,
stick it in your car
or your backpack.
And now you have a
little field guide.
All right, so there's some
major benefits to wild edibles,
and I want to quickly
run through those
as well as how to stay safe.
Benefit number one, free food.
Everybody knows that.
That's synonymous
with wild edibles.
But when you look
at it in-depth,
food costs are
continuously rising.
Every year, they go up 3% to 5%.
When I wrote my book in 2013,
they were already expensive.
But in 2019, grocery
store food bills
are even higher than before.
Especially if you want to eat
healthy, you go to Met Market
or you got a co-op,
you can barely
get out of there for less
than 100 bucks, right?
The food that we are going
to learn how to harvest
and eat today is
significantly going
to reduce your monthly
expenditure on food.
So during the summer months,
May through November,
I can offset easily
40% of my food costs
just by harvesting food
out of my backyard.
You don't even have to go far.
Some people think,
oh, wild edibles, it's
a big pain in the butt.
You've gotta get in your car.
You've gotta take an entire day
off of work, go somewhere far.
It's literally stuff that's
growing all around your house,
in a neighborhood park,
that kind of thing.
So wild edibles equal free food.
Wild edibles are also healthier
for you as well as the planet.
So because these
plants are wild,
they're as nature intended.
They have longer
root systems that
can go down below
depleted topsoil
and draw vital minerals.
And they also
often grow in soils
that haven't been depleted.
Janice Schofield, an author
that I deeply respect,
she also says that wild edibles
have stronger immune systems
for the area where they grow.
So for example, if you
live in Tacoma, Washington,
and you harvest a
dandelion that also
lives in Tacoma, Washington,
you can boost your immune system
in the local region.
Additionally, when you eat chips
or crackers from the store,
they come in plastic,
triple-wrapped in plastic.
And the sole purpose of that
plastic is to be thrown away.
That bothers me
every time I do it.
That's the only
use for that thing.
It's for cleanliness
and to be thrown away.
When you eat plants,
anything that's left over
goes in your compost,
turns into soil.
It reduces waste.
So healthier for
you and the planet.
Benefit number three is
the epitome of local food.
The average food,
the average produce
travels roughly
about 2,500 miles
to get from where it's
grown to your plate.
A dandelion grows
in your backyard.
So literally, you walk
out the back door,
and that's textbook local food.
So less of a carbon footprint.
It also diversifies your food.
Michael Pollan, in his
book, "In Defense of Food,"
writes that hundreds
of years ago, we
used to eat up to 80,000
different species of things.
And when I say
species, I'm not just
talking about,
like, elk and deer.
Different plants.
Thousands of different plants.
Thousands of different
nuts, and seeds, and grains.
And then over time, that's
reduced, reduced, reduced to
roughly, he says
3,000, I actually
think it's closer to 300.
So we think we live this
diverse life where one day, we
have Italian food, then
we have Mexican food,
then we have Russian food.
And really, all we're eating is
wheat, corn, corn byproducts,
rice, sugar, and a
few different things.
Why do you think it's important
to have a diverse diet?
Anyone?
So diversity is important
because all food is comprised
of different micronutrients.
And the more diversity we get
in our diet, the more likely
we are to meet all of our
recommended daily allowances.
So we eat some miner's
lettuce, it gives us
some vitamin C.
We eat some kale,
it gives us some protein
and some other minerals,
and so on and so forth.
And when we eat a very diverse
diet, our bodies get enough.
And I really think that
the first person that
coined the phrase
"eat a balanced diet,"
he or she probably pointed
at everything and said,
here's some lakes, eat some
food from there, some algaes.
Here's the ocean, eat some
more seaweed from there.
Eat some pine nuts
from the mountains.
Eat a diverse, balanced diet.
So wild edibles will help
us expand our food options
exponentially.
They also prepare us
for unfortunate events.
Should a disaster
ever happen, you'll
actually know what to eat.
And two other benefits that
are worth mentioning is, A,
they're going to help you
bond and make memories
with your friends and family.
It's really important.
Have you ever cooked
a meal together?
You laugh.
You play.
Now imagine going outside,
and harvesting the food,
and then making the meal.
It just adds another layer.
And finally, we're
all here, outside,
becoming more and more of
a commodity these days.
We're standing.
We're getting vitamin
D. Probably a little bit
too much for our
liking at the moment,
but we're getting
vitamin D from the sun.
We're breathing in fresh air.
And we're going to crouch,
and we're going to dig,
and that's going to lead to
a benefit we call exercise.
That's my spiel.
I could talk more
on this, but I think
we should just get it,
start talking about plants.
A little warning, we're going
to be very repetitive today,
and I do that systematically
because I want you to remember.
One of my wild edibles teachers,
she actually lives in Issaquah.
Her name is Karen Sherwood
of EarthWalk Northwest.
And that's one of the
lessons I took away from her,
is that if you are repetitive,
you strengthen a muscle,
and then you'll remember it
for the rest of your life.
So that's how we're going
to remember a lot of plants.
On that note, let's go.
This is the only one I found.
I've been coming to this
park for about a month now,
every couple days.
And this is the only wild
sweet pea that I found.
This is a very
controversial plant.
So at every wild edibles
class I've ever done,
somebody's always like, but
what about the guy in "Into
the Wild"?
He supposedly died
from eating sweet peas,
a version of this plant.
And the first thing I
want to say about that
is that story is
very inaccurate.
You read the book,
it says one thing.
You watch the movie, it's a
completely different story.
Jon Krakauer has been criticized
heavily for a lot of his books,
but "Into the Wild" is
probably the biggest criticism
he's received.
There's an author, his name is
Samuel Thayer, really awesome
dude, a forager I respect.
In his book,
"Nature's Garden," he
has a great account of "Into
the Wild," the true story.
Basically, what ended up
happening is Chris McCandless,
he starved to death.
That was what the
coroner determined.
But it wasn't a very good story
because this kid going out
into the woods, and
for many, many months,
not getting enough calories, and
then starving to death, well,
how are you going to sell that?
It's a much more
interesting story
to sell this scary fable
about how he just ate a plant,
and it killed him.
So he supposedly mistook wild
sweet pea for wild potato.
After he died, both wild
sweet peas and wild potatoes
were studied extensively,
and neither of the plants
were found to be poisonous.
In fact, one of the botanists
that studied the plant
said that "I would
eat both plants."
So.
This is a very
lovely, tasty plant.
It tastes just
like a bean sprout.
And it grows all over.
It develops purple flowers.
Sometimes, they're yellow.
Kind of looks like a house pea.
It's a vine, right?
Today, a lot of what
we're going to be doing
is I'm going to say,
please describe it to me,
please describe it to me.
So just take it, take
a look, pass it around.
Take one, pass it around.
So what does it look like?
>> It looks like a sweet pea.
I need more
information than that.
>> It has rabbit
ears for leaves.
>> Yeah, rabbit ears for leaves.
>> Like, curly
cues and tendrils.
>> Ah, I like curly
So initially, when you go
out, and you look for plants,
they all look green, and
it's hard to differentiate
between the two.
And this is where we get
scared, because we're like,
oh, well, how do I learn
what a sweet pea is
versus a sweet potato?
Or whatever.
He learned about
it in the same way
that you learn how to identify
a cabbage versus a head
of iceberg lettuce.
Our brains have
folders in our heads,
and the folders just
start storing information.
And that information is
called a search image.
So when you're very
young, you probably
didn't know the difference
between a lemon and an orange,
right?
Your parents could show
you a lemon and an orange,
you'd be like, I don't
know, they both look round,
and they both have a skin.
And eventually, as
you came in contact
with lemons and oranges,
you started differentiating
one and the other.
The same thing is
going to happen
when we talk about plants.
So when I say, what
does it look like?
And somebody says,
oh, it has tendrils,
that's a very good identifying
characteristic that's
going to help you
recognize the plant.
So we're improving
our search image.
And when you look at
a plant long enough,
the folder gets really full.
And then for the
rest of your life,
you'll know this is
a wild sweet pea.
The sweet pea also teaches us
something called meristems.
And meristems are the
growing parts of plants.
So when a plant is growing--
"meristem" actually comes from
the Greek term "to divide."
So when cells divide
and split apart,
those are called
meristematic parts.
So when a plant is
young, it's light green,
and it's very flexible.
It's full of sugars.
It's full of minerals
and vitamins.
And that's when it's most
nutritious and most delicious.
As the plant gets
taller or longer,
the plant cannot support
itself if it's all flexible.
So it starts developing a
solid foundation, very fibrous.
So if you feel this
plant, the bottom
is very stiff
compared to the top.
So this part is meristematic.
Like the tops of
asparagus, for example.
You can snap them off.
They're very flexible.
They're very delicious.
But you go down
the stem, and it's
very fibrous, not as delicious.
So as foragers,
we're going to want
to look for the tops,
the meristematic bits.
So on the wild sweet pea,
in addition to the flower,
the meristematic part is
this tender little bit.
On we go.
There you go.
My gift to you.
Uh-huh?
>> Sergei?
>> Sergei, yeah.
>> Sergei.
So the whole plant is edible?
>> So the whole plant
is edible, but--
>> The top part, everything?
>> We're going to
talk about that.
It's very objective.
While you can eat this part--
>> How hungry are you?
More often than not,
I just go through,
and I'd harvest a
small bowl of those.
And that's what I'd
throw on a salad.
>> OK.
>> OK, on we go.
My friends get sick of this
because they'll take me out
on a hike, and I'm
like, oh, oh, oh.
There's, like, five things
to talk about right here.
So the next thing that I want
to talk about, which most of us
already know, is grass.
Grass is a plant that most
people can already identify.
Right?
There's lots of different
varieties of grass.
And in my book, it's probably
the best survival food
because everybody
knows what grass is.
It's hard to miss.
There's some sedges and stuff
that kind of look like grass,
but more often than not, people
know what grass looks like.
Grass has all the
vitamins and minerals
necessary to maintain
proper body function, which
means that if your car ever
gets stuck in the forest,
and you don't know what else
to do, you're really hungry,
grass will sustain you.
Now we're not cattle.
We don't have seven stomachs.
It's very hard to digest.
But again, if we look for
the meristematic bits,
the light green parts,
they're kind of chewy.
And here-- hold on.
Whenever I do this on
camera, it never works, but--
boom, bam.
See?
>> Oh, yeah.
>> So maybe let's all try this.
Let's all come over here,
and just pull on the top,
and try and expose
this light green part.
So grass is kind
of a tube, right?
And if you pull at just the
right place, you can expose--
you hear like a little
squeak, like a whoop.
[INDISTINCT CHATTER]
So when we were
hiking on the trail,
for example, one
thing I would do,
I would get ahead of my
family because I was walking,
I'm the fastest.
I was a 13-year-old boy and
had a lot of energy to expend.
And I would just walk
all day, and I'd--
[CRUNCH] And throw it away.
[CRUNCH] Throw it away.
So by the end of
the day, maybe I
had a thousand pieces of grass.
And this part is
actually quite delicious.
Again, it's that meristematic,
asparagus-like part.
And then the other
thing that accomplishes
is because nature is very wise,
so when I harvest this, eat
this little bit, and
then throw the grass,
I'm planting more grass.
It's a symbiotic relationship.
Ann Wigmore.
Has anybody heard the
name Ann Wigmore before?
She's the lady that
popularized wheat grass.
So she was a Lithuanian
woman who had
all kinds of health problems.
And the medical
industry basically
said we can't help you.
And she noticed that her cat
was sitting and eating grass
every time it was sick, and
then it would get better.
So Ann Wigmore
started eating grass,
and her health problems
started going away.
And she was the lady that
pioneered wheatgrass.
So now you go to
the store, and you
pay $4 for a little
shot of wheatgrass,
it's because of her.
But I have a little
secret for you.
You could just juice the grass
in your yard, and then save $4.
How about that?
>> It's the same quality?
>> It's the same exact quality.
There's nothing special
about wheatgrass other
than it grows the fastest.
I used to grow wheatgrass
for a health institute.
And a certain red,
hard wheat just
produces the most
grass the quickest.
But there's lots of
other wild grasses
that are more
nutritious than that.
Now if you're going to
juice grass or blend it
in a smoothie, you have
to ensure that it hasn't
been sprayed with pesticides.
So in my own backyard,
I know for two years,
we haven't been spraying it.
I would definitely throw that
in a green smoothie or juice it.
But I wouldn't go, necessarily,
to a park to do it.
The next plant is right over
here that I want to talk about.
Anybody know what this is?
>> Thistle?
>> Is it milkweed?
>> Dandelion things?
>> I like where you're going.
You guys are not wrong.
So this is called sow thistle.
And I already knows what
this looks like, so why don't
you guys pass it around?
Sow thistle is in the
same family as dandelion,
which is the sunflower family.
And it's essentially
the root of lettuce.
So thousands of years ago,
when lettuce didn't exist,
people just ate dandelions
and sow thistle.
If you've ever
chewed on dandelion,
you know that it's very bitter.
My guess is how we got
lettuce from dandelions
is people got really sick
of that bitter taste,
and so they started looking
for varieties of dandelion that
were less bitter.
And once they
found that variety,
they started waiting for
that variety to go to seed,
growing those seeds, and then
again choosing selectively
the least bitter variety
and growing those seeds.
And over time, we
have Romaine lettuce,
which almost looks
nothing like dandelion,
but it's in the same family.
So both sow thistle and
dandelion are extremely
good for our inner organs.
The bitterness, the white milky
sap, which some people say
is not good to eat--
that's pure BS.
That bitterness
is actually really
good for cleansing
our gallbladder,
our pancreas, our kidneys,
and it also aids digestion.
We need bitters to help produce
saliva and bile in our stomach,
and it helps digest food.
Unfortunately, now that we
eat donuts, and cheesecake,
and all that stuff, bitter
just doesn't compete.
So we throw the
dandelions away, or we
complain that they're
weeds, when in fact, we
should be eating more of this
and throwing the donut away.
The easiest way
to eat dandelions
is to blend them in
a green smoothie.
Because when you blend
sweet with bitter,
the sweetness
counteracts the bitter.
And then the other thing
that's good to do with them
is put them in a pesto.
So you make pesto
with pine nuts,
a little Parmesan, basil,
just cut out the basil
and throw the
dandelions in there.
And then the sweet and-- oh,
sorry-- the salty and bitter,
it tastes delicious.
All right, let's keep going.
There you go.
>> Thank you.
>> Sergei.
>> Uh-huh?
>> Are you going to
talk about oxalates?
>> Absolutely.
>> Oh, good.
>> Thanks for bringing that up.
Yeah.
What was your name?
>> Jenny.
>> Yeah.
>> Nice to meet you, Jenny.
>> Nice to meet you too.
>> Craig.
>> Yeah.
And how about dandelion roots?
They seem so substantial.
Can you cook them?
>> I love it.
Yeah, let's talk about it.
>> OK.
>> So let's address dandelions.
I had two questions.
Number one, oxalates.
There's two ways to
think about plants.
Number one, there's the
botanist, toxicology
perspective, which is, is
this plant poisonous or edible
based on its chemical buildup?
And when you look at that,
almost everything is poisonous.
So if you read a book
about toxicology,
you find that things
like mint are poisonous.
Dandelions have certain
alkaloids or oxalates in them
that are poisonous,
in large quantities.
And the second
perspective is more
the Native American perspective
where nothing is poisonous,
it's all about dosage, certain
parts that you can eat,
and the time of year
that you can eat it.
I tend to side more with the
Native American perspective
because all the research that
I've done points that that
is the right direction.
So oxalates.
All greens have some trace
amounts of either alkaloids,
oxalates, or anti-nutrients.
It's a mechanism to
preserve the plant.
So the plant doesn't want
you to only eat kale,
because if we only ate
kale, kale would go extinct.
So kale tells you this.
It says, you can eat me, but
if you eat 10 buckets of me,
you're going to have some signs
of less than perfect health.
Maybe a stomach ache.
Maybe you're going to
get a little hives.
Some relatively minor issues
that we would like to avoid,
but nonetheless, it's
not going to kill you.
My mom, Victoria
Boutenko, she came up
with the concept
of green smoothies
and popularized them
through her books.
And people loved
it for 10 years.
And then all of this,
don't eat kale and spinach
because it has oxalates
stuff started coming around,
because people supposedly
would get gallstones
from that, right?
The trouble with that theory
is that chocolate, beer, wheat,
and a bunch of other stuff
have oxalates in them too,
and nobody is saying don't
eat chocolate, wheat,
or beer, at least not
at the local brewery.
But it's the green smoothie
that gives you the gallstones,
right?
So I have many resources
online about this subject
in particular.
I actually have a YouTube video.
I'm on YouTube prevalently.
And basically, it's a non-issue
if you eat a diverse diet.
If you were to eat buckets of
kale every single day, again,
you might run into
some problems.
If you rotate your greens,
if you rotate the food
that you eat, it's not an
issue because those oxalates
will get eradicated through
your kidneys and liver.
So it's not a big deal.
Now if you were
to eat seasonally,
this would be even
less of an issue
because in the
springtime, you're
going to eat lots of dandelions.
Then dandelions go away, you're
going to eat something else.
But because we've, quote,
unquote, "improved" life, where
now we have kale all year
round at the grocery store,
it's more of an issue.
The second question was,
do you eat things cooked?
Yeah.
Wild edibles, you're
going to cram them
in your diet every which way.
You can throw them
in salads, and I'll
spotlight some of the things
that you could do with salads.
Put these in
smoothies, juice them.
You can also put them on your
pizzas and saute them up.
Throw them in soups.
Get them into your
diet as best as you can
because these are superfoods.
And these are supplements that
you don't have to pay for.
One of my rants on
supplements is that it's
kind of controversial.
Some people don't
like that I say this,
but I've never
taken supplements.
I've tried many times, but I've
found that there's no effect.
Supplements, first, are
sold on a fear-based scheme.
The nutrients that are
around is not enough.
If you just eat organic food,
you'll never be healthy.
That's how that
supplement story starts.
And then you're like, oh, no.
Man, even if I
shop at Whole Foods
and buy the best
ingredients that I can buy,
I still don't get enough?
That's scary.
Maybe I should get
your supplement.
You take the best supplement,
the best, most expensive
supplement, you twirl it around
and read on the ingredients
list, and what is it made of?
>> Corn.
>> Yeah.
Most of the time,
it's like rice protein
with some of the good stuff.
Like 90% rice, 10%
everything else.
But if it's a really
high quality supplement,
it's made out of
fresh, organic produce.
So please explain to me how
if lettuce doesn't have enough
of what I need, but
the supplement that I'm
buying from you is
made from lettuce,
how does that make sense?
OK, let's talk about
this plant right here.
Everybody grab one.
When we harvest plants,
I encourage everybody
to engage all of their senses.
We have five senses
because each one of those
is a different form
of communication.
Each one of those senses is
meant to help keep us safe.
So sometimes, when people
get poisoned from eating
stuff they're not supposed to,
it's because they just like--
[CRUNCH] And they
only engage one sense.
Well, that's four other
tests that you failed to do.
And the other thing on
that that I want to say
is that wild plants
are not dangerous.
The only way that you
would get poisoned
is if you're just going
through the woods,
and you just start
eating stuff before you
identify what they are.
All right?
There's no bad dandelion
sitting in an alley,
waiting for you to
walk down that alley
so they can jump
down your throat.
So number one, if you
can resist the temptation
to just eat foreign foods,
you'll always be safe.
Then we engage our senses.
So we put all plants through
five different tests.
First, what does it look like?
So what does this look like?
>> Chamomile.
>> Kind of like chamomile.
I like it.
You're a professional.
>> It smells like chamomile.
>> So it looks like chamomile.
So already, it's
telling us, hey,
this looks like a familiar food
that I'm accustomed to eating.
Right?
That's a very good point.
I'm so glad you brought that up.
The next test is, what
does it feel like?
>> It's soft.
I couldn't conceivably eat
this because it feels soft.
If I were to try and eat
that telephone pole--
maybe my eyes
would get confused,
I don't think they would,
but if my eyes got confused,
I'd feel it, and my hands would
tell me what my eyes missed.
This is really hard.
I'd break my teeth
if I would eat it.
Right?
This little plant has now
passed the looking test
and the feeling test.
Now what does it smell like?
>> It smells really good.
>> Fresh.
>> If you smash the flower,
it smells like pineapple.
And I'm so glad you're
bringing this up
because this is
called pineapple weed,
and it's a wild chamomile.
>> Oh, it does.
>> So look at that.
This is how we
learn about plants.
So it looks like chamomile.
Well, lots of plants
look like chamomile.
We feel it.
It feels soft.
We smell it.
Oh, wow, it smells
like pineapple.
So now we just learned,
looks like chamomile,
smells like pineapple.
Those are really good
identifying characteristics.
So we have two more senses.
What does it sound like?
In Native American
lore, you would actually
talk to the plant, and it
would talk to you, which
is a quality that I've lost.
But I interpret that sense to be
like, what does the environment
sound like?
I hear somebody mowing.
Is somebody spraying chemicals?
Is there a big roadway nearby?
Is there anything and is there
any sound that might jeopardize
the edibility of this plant?
And then the very last test
is, what does it taste like?
And so you're not just
going to grab a bunch of it
at the beginning, and just
put it in your mouth, and go,
I hope it tastes good.
You're going to
approach it cautiously,
and you're going to
just eat a little bit,
and then you're going to wait.
And then if you do
this cautiously,
and over time, you'll
understand, oh, chamomile.
Wild chamomile,
a.k.a., pineapple weed.
If you dry this, it
makes a really good tea.
Chamomile has
calming properties.
If you have any sort of
allergic stuff going on
because of the seasons or food
allergies, it'll soothe those.
And it also helps
to improve sleep.
So what I would do, I would
actually throw these flowers
and tender leaves into salad.
I would saute them, put them
on an omelet, if you will.
Throw them in soups.
Or just dry the leaves and
make a tea out of them.
>> So if you did do that,
if you put it on a salad,
how many of these would
you do without being--
>> OK, so if that was my very
first time eating this plant--
>> Yes.
>> I would just put a
handful on it, right?
And then just see what happens.
>> Put a handful?
>> A handful is fine.
A lot of people get
nervous about wild edibles
because they think, oh,
if I misidentify it,
the consequences are huge.
But the consequences,
most of the time,
are relatively
insignificant, like you
might get a little bit
of a stomach upset.
That being said, we want to
eliminate as many variables
and consequences as possible,
so we approach new food
cautiously, and then we
eliminate those variables.
And in fact, actually, on
that sheet that I gave you,
I have Sergei's
Rules for Foraging,
and it's three simple rules.
Number one, don't eat something
if you don't know what it is.
Kind of common sense.
A lot of people actually
disregard that, surprisingly.
I get emails all the
time, people say,
my kids and I went out, and
we harvested this plant.
Can you tell us what it is?
We ate a bunch of it.
So I actually made a rap
song that's on YouTube,
called, "Don't Eat Something
if You Don't Know What It Is,"
that plays around with
how silly that can be.
The second rule is eat new
foods in small amounts.
So maybe when you're young,
everything is foreign to you,
and your parents
are very cautious.
Like, what happens when
he eats sweet potatoes?
He's good.
What happens when
he eats lettuce?
Oh, he's fine.
And then maybe you
get to peanuts,
and your parents figure out
pretty quickly, oh, peanuts
don't do so well for him.
So you learn at a young
age what you're allergic to
and what you're not allergic to.
Well, in the interest
of staying safe,
that's essentially what
you're doing when you're
playing around with new plants.
So you're going to approach
all new plants as though you're
potentially allergic to them.
So even though Sergei says
pineapple weed is 100% edible,
the first time you
eat pineapple weed,
you're just going
to eat a little bit.
And then rule number three
is you don't mix plants.
Because if I made a salad
with 15 new wild edibles,
and then I had an
allergic reaction,
it'd be very hard to weed
out what caused it, right?
All right, let's keep going.
So real quick, what do
you guys see right now
when you look at this park?
What's the first thing
that comes to mind?
>> Grass.
>> Dandelions.
Dandelions.
>> Dogs walking.
I like all those things.
Because look, you
already just altered
your world a little bit.
Maybe before this started, you
would have just seen a park.
Now I already heard two
different edibles-- grass
and dandelions.
And three, I love that
you said "dogs walking,"
because that's a really
good thing to consider.
Hey, there's animals.
It's a high trafficked area.
Good job.
One more thing about dandelions.
These things are really
edible, and they're delicious,
the little flowers.
So when you're at home, I invite
you to-- this is your homework.
Just take one of these flowers,
and plop it in your mouth,
chew it up.
You'll notice that
it's very sweet.
Kind of has a pleasant,
green, kale-like taste.
These things concentrate
vitamin D. And guess what?
In areas where we lack it
many months out of the year,
this is a really good
thing to put in your diet.
Now how do you eat it?
Flower fritters.
You can fry them up in a
little bit of oil and batter.
Great.
You can also take these
and stick them in honey,
and the honey will just
concentrate, preserve them,
right?
So you make a
dandelion-infused jam.
You can throw them
on salads raw.
You can throw them in soups.
One thing I like to do sometimes
is actually take the petals out
of it, put them in an ice
cube tray, fill it with water,
freeze them.
Now you have flower
petal-infused ice.
And in the summer, you
drink, it looks beautiful.
Makes sense?
OK, we're going to go
into the shade over there,
get a little reprieve from the
sun and talk about some plants.
>> Is it necessary
to wash those?
>> Oh, yeah.
Is it necessary to wash that?
Absolutely.
You want to wash stuff.
>> OK.
>> Yeah.
>> Just asking.
>> I like it.
>> It sounded like you
just throw it right in.
>> OK, there's been a few
follow ups about dandelion.
One is about the roots,
and one about the leaves.
Let's see if we can't get both
here, so we'll do some digging.
And careful.
There's blackberries.
OK.
Number one, if you can find
a dandelion-- actually,
I'd love everybody to grab a
leaf of dandelion if you can.
OK, everybody has a
dandelion leaf, right?
Here's a test to identify
a true dandelion.
You're going to flip
it over, and you're
going to run your finger
along the main vein.
Tell me what you feel.
>> Smooth.
>> Fuzz on leaf.
>> Fuzz?
Uh-oh.
Let's see.
>> Fuzzy.
>> No, it should be smooth.
>> It's pretty smooth.
>> So the leaves
are a little fuzzy,
but the vein of a
dandelion is smooth.
That's a true dandelion.
So that's one great
identifying characteristic.
>> So this one with
fuzz on it is not?
>> So the one with fuzz
on it is not a dandelion.
So there's lots of different
varieties of dandelions.
Like I already
mentioned, they're
in the sunflower family.
The sunflower family is the
largest family of plants.
There's nearly 24,000 varieties,
and a lot of those are edible.
I don't want to
speak in absolutes.
I don't want to say
all of them are edible,
because some people
might be allergic
to dandelion, for example.
And so for them,
they're not edible.
But it's a very good family to
get accustomed to because you
could potentially expand
your food choices 24,000
different ways, all right?
And I believe there's over
300 varieties of dandelions,
and all of them are edible.
You can eat the leaves in
smoothies, and soups, salads.
You can eat the flowers.
You can eat the stems.
And you can also eat the roots.
But generally, I
don't eat the roots
because when you harvest the
roots, it kills the plant.
So in my book, I have a chapter
called "Respect the Roots."
With something like a
dandelion, it's not a big issue
because dandelions are
extremely resilient.
So if you see 100
dandelions growing,
you can eat 99 of them,
and they'll be fine.
But with other plants,
like wild ginger,
for example, it's
really, really sensitive.
So if you start
harvesting roots,
you're going to wipe
out that population.
And then it won't grow there.
So in an effort to
be more ecological,
I suppose, and responsible, I
often stay away from the roots,
and just harvest the
greens and the fruits,
because I feel like that's
nature's gift to us.
And I also am kind
of lazy sometimes,
I feel like it's a
lot easier to harvest
some greens than some roots.
So that's where
I stand on roots.
If you were to eat them, you
could bake them in the same way
that you bake sweet
potatoes or potatoes.
In the South, they actually
make a coffee substitute out
of dandelion roots
and chicory roots.
It does not have caffeine, so
you get the taste of coffee,
but you don't get the stimulant.
What else can I tell you?
Is there any other
questions about roots?
>> Do you worry about the
soil that they're growing in?
Like in this park,
would you eat the roots?
>> In this park, I probably
would not eat the roots
because I haven't
done my due diligence.
I haven't called
the parks service
to figure out what they
spray or don't spray.
But in my yard, I
would eat the roots.
Absolutely.
Yeah.
OK, we're standing under a tree.
Who knows what kind
of tree this is?
>> Horse chestnut.
So horse chestnuts are not
traditionally considered
edible.
But since we're here, I
just want to point out--
everybody grab a chestnut.
So they look very
similar to the chestnuts
that we eat around
Christmas time.
The one major difference between
those and horse chestnuts
is that the edible ones have
a deep point on one side.
And these ones are kind
of round with no point.
If you ever want to
identify a true chestnut,
it's going to look just like
this, but the butt of it
is going to have a sharp point.
So why are some edible?
Why are some not?
It's an alkaloid issue.
We talked about oxalates.
Horse chestnuts just
concentrate more tannins.
So they're very bitter.
They hurt our stomach.
They're not considered edible,
so you would not eat these.
But the other chestnuts
with the point,
they have less tannins,
thus, they are more edible.
And again, something like
this, Native Americans
might not consider
poisonous because there
are ways of extracting tannins
from acorns and chestnuts.
But they're very
labor-intensive.
And like I said, I'm
a little bit lazy.
I like to throw something
in my blender and get going.
So I can do it, but
I generally don't.
Make sense?
Again, we have
some wild grasses.
Now you can see there's two
different varieties at least.
So you have more of a
wild oat type-looking
grass, which has seeds.
And then you have a big--
you have another variety
of grass, which probably,
from a foraging standpoint, is
going to be a much better thing
to spend your time harvesting
because look how thick it
is versus this.
And you pull on the top.
There's more meristematic
bits to eat versus this.
So one thing to think about
if you're harvesting food,
you're going to go for something
that gives you more reward,
right?
And it would be
the thicker grass.
The other thing worth pointing
out right here is blackberries.
So blackberries, obviously,
the berries are edible.
But the leaves on
blackberries are also edible.
And in fact, they're really
good for things like dysentery,
for fungus stuff.
They have antibacterial
properties.
If you're traveling,
for example,
and you run into stomach
issues, you can eat charcoal,
but you can also eat
blackberries, raspberries,
thimble berries.
Those leaves will help
settle your stomach.
>> How would you eat them?
>> So how would you eat them?
Good question.
So right here, check it out.
Another lesson in meristems.
So everybody try and get close.
And you can see that
as the plant matures,
the thorns get really
stiff and hard.
But then if you look
at the top part,
you see that it's lighter green.
That's the meristematic
part of the blackberry.
And now very carefully
just feel the thorns
and notice how they're
not quite developed yet.
So you can go through
with a little knife,
and peel the thorns, and eat the
little stems of the blackberry.
And that's more like your
little wild asparagus.
Or you can take the
young leaves, which
are pretty much thornless,
use those in a salad.
Or if you boil them
down, the thorns
become completely not an issue.
They just go away.
The best way that
I've found to use them
is you just dry these leaves,
crush them up, throw them
in tea.
And then take a
little bit with you
when you travel internationally.
And now you know that this stuff
will help settle your stomach.
Now the one caution about your
blackberries and raspberries
is you don't want to eat the
leaves when they're wilting.
So you want to eat them fresh,
or you want to fully dry them.
Because in the
wilting process, they
start releasing more
alkaloids or something,
and it can sometimes
have the opposite effect.
But if you eat them fresh, like
within an hour of harvesting,
or fully dry,
completely, no problem.
All blackberries and raspberries
are in the rose family.
Roses, apples, blackberries
are in the same family.
And a lot of those relatives
are edible and delicious.
By the way, wild roses are
delicious in salads, just
the petals themselves.
And since in Washington,
you have a lot of them,
and they grow like
weeds, eat the weeds.
Right behind you,
there's another plant
I want to talk about.
It's called common mallow.
That's it.
Yeah.
We'll sacrifice this
root for the group.
OK.
I want to hear it.
What does it look like?
>> Chrysanthemum.
>> Geranium.
Good.
>> Oh, yeah, Geranium.
>> What else?
>> It kind of looks
like a lily pad.
>> I'll tell you a little story.
Here in Tacoma,
actually, we're really
lucky because two
really good foragers
live within driving range.
One of my teachers, her
name is Karen Sherwood,
she lives in Issaquah.
And every Memorial
Day holiday, she
hosts a three-day retreat
outside of Yakima,
where all you do all day
long is you harvest plants,
and then you make food,
and you harvest plants,
and you make food.
Really good thing to
look up-- her company
is called EarthWalk Northwest.
And then another guy does the
same thing out of Portland.
His name is John Kallas.
He's another awesome dude.
So when I went to my
first workshop with Karen,
she said, Sergei,
here's a big bowl.
Go get a bunch of clovers.
Put it in your salad.
We're going to put it
in everybody's salad.
So I go out with the bowl,
and I don't collect anything.
I can't find a single
clover to save my life.
And I come back deflated.
And I'm like, Karen,
there's no clover.
She says, take this bowl.
Go back to the field.
Squat, crawl if you have to, but
bring it back full of clovers.
So I go back to the exact
same field where I was.
It was on a farm property.
And I squat, and I
start looking closely.
It was an entire
field of clover.
I just wasn't
looking close enough.
So there, I learned
the importance
of describing a plant.
And when I say, what
does it look like?
I'm not looking for
anything specific.
I mean, I am because I
know what it looks like,
but I'm looking for keywords
to hear how will you
remember this plant.
So when I say, what
does it look like?
What I want to hear
from you is, how
will you remember this plant?
Let's try it again.
What does it look like?
>> A doily.
I like it.
Uh-huh.
What else?
>> It's soft.
I love that.
>> A rough stem though.
>> Very good.
So look at all these things.
It looks like a
Geranium and a doily.
It's got a soft, fuzzy
flower and a rough stem.
Great characteristics.
>> It has lots of stems
instead of just one main one.
>> Yes.
It has lots of stems
instead of main ones.
Now if you look at how
it's growing on the ground,
what can you tell me?
Do you think it's
a creeping plant,
or do you think it's
going to grow straight up?
>> Creeping.
>> Very good identifying
characteristic.
So this plant is called mallow,
common mallow, or Malva.
And it's actually a
close relative of okra.
>> Oh, yeah.
>> So when you see this plant,
this is one of the best eats
that you can forage.
And it's a very common weed.
It likes dry soils,
so you'll generally
find it growing in the sun.
Every part is edible,
though the flowers--
or the leaves--
I'm sorry-- are
the most delicious.
And if you were to eat them,
they taste just like okra.
They have a gelatinous
quality to them.
So what can you do with that?
You could put it in a gumbo.
Can make an okra gumbo.
Great in soups.
Sometimes, when you
make a smoothie,
and it starts to separate,
kind of looks unappetizing,
you throw a little common mallow
in it, and it binds it better.
In fact, in the
olden days, they used
to use this plant in the
cheese-making process
where they would use
it as a binding agent.
It also has little flowers.
And the flowers, they almost
look like the little bluebells
that grow everywhere.
And these flowers are
delicious in salads.
If you ever go to a potluck,
and you bring a salad,
and sprinkle a handful on top
of that, people will go bananas.
This grows in your backyard.
Any questions about
common mallow?
>> How do you spell that?
>> M-A-L-L-O-W. There's a
guy, his name is David Wolfe.
He's kind of a health nut guy.
He's been all over social
media for many years.
But when I met the guy, right
before we started hiking
the trail, actually, he
introduced me to this plant.
And what we would
do is we'd just
take big leaves of mallow,
roll avocado in them,
and sprinkle them
with lemon juice.
It was a really delicious
snack, actually.
On we go.
Oh.
We didn't go very far.
What is this plant right here?
It's a bottle.
Somebody said it.
>> Dead nettle.
Oh, that sounds really scary.
Everybody grab one,
and let's study it.
Perfect.
We might sit here for a while.
There's some over there too.
This is called
purple dead nettle.
And it has a very ominous name.
It's actually not
poisonous at all.
This is a wild mint.
Doesn't smell like mint.
So we're engaging
all our senses.
Everybody smell it.
Kind of has a musky smell.
The reason it's called
purple dead nettle
is because it looks similar
to stinging nettles.
And because of that,
people don't like the way
that nettles itches.
I guess that's where
it got the name.
All mints have a square stem.
So just like the dandelion
has a smooth stem,
all mints have a square stem.
The mint family is
full of edible plants.
It's a good thing to know.
How would you use this?
I would just basically
take that much of it
and throw it in anything,
whether that is a salad.
It's a little bit fuzzy, so I
probably wouldn't eat this raw.
I mean, I could eat it raw,
but because it's a little bit
fuzzy, I wouldn't
enjoy it as much.
So let's come up with some
ways that you would eat this.
Anybody?
>> As a saute.
>> Tea.
>> Saute.
I like the tea idea, but
let's get creative here.
What else could
you do with this?
Don't worry.
If you say something I
don't like, I'll tell you.
>> Pizza.
Anybody else?
>> Tempura.
Yeah, I like it.
Those are all great.
>> Can you eat the stem?
>> You can eat the stem.
And all mints, again,
help to calm the system.
So if you have any sort
of seasonal allergies,
or you ate something, and it
doesn't agree with your belly,
eating a little bit of mint
will help to soothe it.
So that's a really
good thing to know.
So maybe if you're going
traveling internationally,
if you want to go
above and beyond,
you take some purple dead
nettle, and you dry the leaves.
And you mix it with some
blackberries or raspberries,
and you dry the leaves.
And you make yourself a little
bag of greens, which hopefully,
customs won't sniff you for.
I usually put it in a
little supplement bottle.
I think that's what
supplements are good.
They have a nice little thing.
And then I just make a
tea out of them abroad.
OK, who remembers the
quiz that I gave them?
Everybody grab some of these.
These are little
baby helicopters.
And helicopters identify
a plant, or a tree,
and what's that tree?
>> Maple.
Very good.
So this forest-- this park
has lots of different types
of trees in it.
And trees are a class
of foods that I would
consider as a survival food.
Because a lot of the
common trees that we're
used to encountering have
edible parts, and maple
is certainly one of them.
They're in that grass area,
where it's not the best
meal that you'll ever have.
But they are edible, so
in dire circumstances,
you could eat these
tiny little maple seeds.
They'll give you some nutrition.
You can also see how some of
these leaves are very tender.
And actually, it's maple,
so they're very sticky.
Grab a leaf.
Feel a leaf.
And that stickiness is
actually maple syrup, right?
The lifeblood of a maple
tree is a clear fluid
that's like maple juice.
And then people will go
in here, and tap the tree,
and get a big bucket full
of this clear maple juice,
maple blood.
And then they'll boil it
down for about 30 hours.
I believe it's 30 hours.
It might even be longer.
And eventually, it'll
concentrate and turn
into maple syrup.
And just like you can
do that with maple,
you could also do it with birch.
You could do it with aspen.
And so in Europe,
during World War II,
when there was food shortages,
a lot of people in Russia,
and Germany, and France,
they actually went,
and they would eat
little buds of maples,
the seed pods, the leaves.
And they would cook
them in their soups.
It's pure nutrition.
So it's really good
to know about that.
Hey, this is a maple.
That's a beech.
That's a birch.
And all parts of those
things are edible.
There's a layer
inside the bark called
the cambium layer,
the inner layer,
it makes for good eating.
That would be in the same
category as roots though.
And you want to know exactly
what you're doing so as
not to kill the tree.
Over here.
OK, if I was a wild
edible superhero,
and I had a tool
belt, on my tool belt,
I would certainly
include this plant.
So grab a leaf and
pass it around.
I want to see if I can't
find the other-- there's
two varieties of this plant.
Here, grab a leaf,
pass it around.
This is called plantain, and it
has no relation to the banana.
This is a very fun plant.
This plant has a lot
of amino acids in it,
which is also known as protein,
a lot of plant-based protein.
The reason I would have this
on my belt as a superhero
is because this plant can
literally save your life.
So plantain has this
miraculous quality
to draw poison out of
your system topically.
So for example, a
couple years ago, I
was showing off in
front of some friends,
and I was doing a handstand.
I fell in the grass, and
I got stung on my back
by numerous bees.
And I'm not allergic,
so it wasn't a big deal.
But if you are, it could have
been a really big deal, right?
So it started to hurt.
It was uncomfortable.
And I knew what to do.
I ran around, and
I found this plant.
I chewed it up, made a poultice.
Spit it into my friend's
hand, and I said, can you
please rub it on my back?
Within 10 minutes,
the pain is gone.
So if you ever get stung
by an ant, a bee, a spider.
If you step on a
rusty piece of metal,
and you can't get to
the hospital right away,
this plant will actually
draw toxins out of your skin.
Janice Schofield,
an author that wrote
a book called "Discovering
Wild Plants," she
talks about how her dad, I
guess he was accident prone,
and so one time, he treated a
gunshot wound with this stuff.
And another time, he
had blood poisoning,
which is a very
serious thing, and he
was able to not die,
basically, by applying plantain
to the wound.
Have you ever heard
of psyllium husk?
>> Yes.
>> What is psyllium husk?
It's like a-- oh, here you go.
Liz found it.
This is the other
variety of plantain.
Good job, Liz.
>> Cool.
>> So this is
lance-leaf plantain.
This is broad-leaf plantain.
So psyllium husk is a
supplement-type food
that helps digestion.
It's like natural
vegan gelatin, right?
Where does psyllium
husk come from?
Plantain.
It's a wild-crafted food.
So plantain will develop
these seed pods that
look very similar to baby corn.
It's a little too
early for it right now,
but they'll develop these
massive, long stalks
that can have up to
20,000 seeds on them.
And those little stalks are
delicious when you boil them.
They taste just like baby corn.
That's number one.
When those 20,000 seeds all
develop husks around them,
people somehow
shake the husk away,
and that's what
psyllium husk is.
So what are some of the key
identifying characteristics
of plantain?
>> It's fibrous at the bottom.
Very good.
>> Another color inside.
>> Yeah.
>> I love it.
OK, so the top of the
leaf is a darker green
than the bottom of the leaf.
Can everybody see that?
>> Yeah.
>> There's something
very obvious.
>> The veins grow out long.
>> Yes.
So the veins grow
out really long.
Do you see that?
They're very easy
to distinguish.
>> Yeah, that too.
>> It smells wonderful.
I want to eat it.
>> I think that you
like greens, don't you?
[LAUGHTER]
>> I love greens.
>> So here, check this out.
Here's one of my own personal
identifying characteristics.
So if you take the
stem of plantain,
and you carefully crush it.
Look at this.
>> Whoa.
>> So cool.
>> So try that.
If you can find
plantain near you,
see if you can expose
some of the threads.
[CHATTER]
Oh.
Here, I'll come over here.
Yeah.
Here, play around with that.
I'm going to show these folks.
OK, so yeah.
Check it out.
See how they have
these lateral veins?
>> Mm-hmm.
>> If you just pull
really carefully,
it starts exposing threads.
>> It's like it's been sewn.
>> Like it's been sewn.
Very good.
So now you know what
plantain is like, right?
And so if you're ever in
doubt, like, is that plantain?
You're going to say, oh,
veins that you can easily see.
Long seed pods.
And if you pull on the stalk,
it's going to reveal threads.
plantain.
>> Can you eat the leaves?
>> Absolutely, you
can eat the leaves.
They're pretty rich
in chlorophyll,
which is not a bad thing,
but they do taste strong.
This would be an advanced green.
So put it in a soup.
Throw it on a pizza.
I literally cram wild
edibles into everything.
When I was researching my
book, I'm sitting there,
and I'm just like, what
is this plant good for?
I have nutritional
data in there.
I kid you not, the
USDA, there's a website
called nutritionaldata.com.
And it's basically
USDA information
from the '60s, when
the government just
had a bunch of money they
were throwing at figuring out
what food is rich in.
And surprisingly, they have
quite a few wild edibles
on there.
So I'm sitting there,
compiling these charts.
And I'm thinking, well,
what is plantain good for?
And it's literally
good for everything.
I kid you not.
It's not an exaggeration.
What is dandelion good for?
It's literally good
for everything.
It's got tons of
vitamins and minerals.
It's got amino
acids, antioxidants.
So at that point,
I was like, it's
kind of silly to remember exact
things because it's literally
good for everything.
OK, see this plant with
the purple flowers?
I'll meet you right by it.
Look how pretty this is.
I don't even know what
kind of plant this is,
but I know that it's a mustard.
And the reason I know
that it's a mustard
is because mustards are in
the Brassica family, which has
nearly 2,000 different plants.
It includes broccoli,
cauliflower, cabbage.
And all mustards
smell like mustard.
So sometimes, we rely
too heavily on our eyes.
And we can just be like, oh, I
don't really know what this is.
I don't know what it looks like.
But then you come over here, you
grab a leaf, you crush it up.
And if it's a mustard, it should
start smelling like mustard.
So I invite you to come over
here and do this with me.
This one's pretty faint.
There's other characteristics,
but the leaves on this
are pretty faint-smelling.
Can anybody get a
little hint of mustard?
Look at how big this leaf is.
So did we get a little
hint of mustard?
If not, there's another
mustard over here
that you'll definitely smell it.
Look how big this leaf is.
You can literally wrap,
make little wraps in this.
One thing I like to do,
I call it gorilla wraps.
Ooh, ooh.
No, just kidding.
You take a banana, and you
wrap it in a green leaf.
It could be a collard leaf.
It could be a kale leaf.
It could be a wild mustard leaf.
And what you'll find
is that the greens will
complement the
fruit, and the fruit
will complement the greens.
You could also make a
nice dolma out of this.
Say you like low calorie diets--
here's a perfect
little tortilla.
Also, it has these
beautiful flowers.
All mustards have four petals.
They can be different colors--
yellow, white, purple, pink.
And come over here
and grab one of these.
All mustards also
have six stamen.
Stamen are those
tiny little antennae
that are in the flower.
So they have four
petals, six stamen.
Four of those are going to be
long, and two will be short.
And then this one,
in particular,
has its own version
of the seed pod, which
is like a little pea, almost.
And you can eat those too.
They have a spicy,
peppery taste.
So if I was picking
this plant for food,
I'd be like, look, big leaves.
I'm going to do
something with those.
Maybe I'll cut
them into a salad.
But since they're big, I'd
probably make a wrap out
of this.
This, I'd probably throw
on top of the salad
because they're nice, peppery.
They would enrich it,
make it look beautiful.
And then the seed
pods would just
add a little bit of crunch.
They'd be like a wild sweet pea.
John Kallas, who has a book
called, "Wild Edibles--
From Dirt to Plate."
He says that wild mustards,
through his research,
are the most nutritious
green on the planet.
And so it's a really
good one to know about.
Now let's go this way because
I want to actually demonstrate
how different two
mustards can look,
and yet, they still
smell like mustard.
Check out this plant.
If you touch it, it
starts shooting seeds.
>> Whoa.
>> Yeah.
>> I know.
>> I thought they
were mad at me.
>> Come on, you guys.
This is a bittercress,
which is a mustard.
Yeah.
One of the things I've been
criticized for in my book
is that I don't have regions
for where the plants grow.
And the reason I did
that is because plants,
just like humans and
animals, they love to travel.
[DOG BARKING]
And they have different
mechanisms for doing this.
Hello.
This plant, it propagates
when you touch it.
It literally shoots
out feet away.
That's the plant
saying, I'm going
to produce a lot of offspring.
Maybe let's go over there
so the dog settles down.
So plants love to travel,
and in the natural world,
they get pretty far.
And I think the
regional thing, that's
just something we humans
have made up for convenience.
But nature isn't here
for our convenience.
Let's take one of this.
And we're going to
crush it up and see
if it smells like mustard.
Yep, smells like mustard.
You get it?
Who gets mustard?
Raise your hand if
you get mustard.
>> I get a, like, a musty smell.
>> Yeah.
But it's a very distinct.
So not like the yellow
mustard that comes in a can,
but like arugula mustard.
Think that.
You get it?
Yeah.
So this is called bittercress.
And it's a mustard relative.
Who knows what kind
of tree this is?
>> Elm?
>> Alder?
>> It looks very
similar to an alder.
In fact, if you just
look at the leaves,
they kind of look
like alder leaves.
This is actually a beech tree.
And one of the tall
tales of a beech
is that it has
elephant-like skin.
So that's a great
identifying characteristic.
The other thing is
right beneath your feet.
Let's see if we
can figure it out.
So give yourself a
little squat, and see
if you can't find some nuts.
>> Beech nuts.
So this is how this works.
So, yeah, I think
that's an alder.
And then you look
at your surroundings
and you start engaging
your other senses.
And you find beech nuts.
And right now,
there's no nuts in it.
Why is that?
>> Because the
squirrels took them.
>> Oh, yeah.
There you go.
We found some nuts.
So this is a beech
nut right here.
So in nature, we also
compete with other critters.
And squirrels are much
better at harvesting nuts
than we are because they've
had lots more practice.
And it's also not nut season.
So right now, if we
lived seasonally,
right now would be our time
to eat mustards, and kale,
and dandelions, and grass.
And then later on
in the season, we
would be eating more nuts,
things like beech nuts.
So these are essentially
similar to acorns.
The Native tribes used
to make meal out of them,
and make breads, and
cookies, and all kinds
of little biscuits out of them.
Like I said, there's
not a whole lot
to talk about because
these are last year's nuts,
and it's not great.
But it is a good food source.
They're edible.
They require a little
bit more food prep
than some of the greens,
again, because they
have tannins in them,
and tannins come off
as extremely bitter.
So traditionally, you
would either soak them
or boil them in water.
Native Americans would
actually take a wicker basket,
put a bunch of nuts in there,
like acorns, and just stick
that basket in the stream.
And it was really
ingenious, because it
wasn't any extra work
for them, but the water
that was perpetually changing
would wash the tannins out.
And then they would
take those nuts
after 24 or 48 hours,
grind them, make a flour,
and then make food out of it.
So looks like an alder,
has elephant-like skin,
and then when you get
close and personal,
you see that it has little nuts.
And now we just
identified beech.
This is something that
all gardeners should know.
The little white stuff.
Yeah.
>> Is that meadow palm?
>> That might be one
common name for it.
I know this as chickweed.
So everybody grab
yourself a chickweed.
This is the macro part
of the wild edible walk.
>> Yeah.
>> Chickweed is
like a wild lettuce.
It's a very common herb.
It's a very common
weed in gardens.
So when you go, and you plant
a garden, a lot of weeds
start growing there.
And if you weed them out
before they really get big,
before you can
identify what they are,
you miss out on a
bunch of free food.
One of my friends in
Missoula runs a garden.
He just runs a big farm.
A lot of the stuff that grows
in between the rows of corn,
or onion, or whatever,
is things like chickweed.
And they're actually more
nutritious than the food that's
being grown.
We just forget to look for them.
So Kiley, my girlfriend,
can attest to this.
We're planting our
garden right now.
And she really
desperately wants to weed,
and I'm like, save that.
That's really good food.
This is a vitamin C powerhouse.
So this is like nature's
Emergen-C. I believe
a cup of this has over 90
milligrams of vitamin C,
so that's antioxidant-rich.
It's got properties that
will help fight off cancer.
You're going to be less
likely to ever develop cancer
if you eat this stuff.
And it tastes awesome.
It's like a really mild lettuce.
Let's examine the flowers first.
Tell me what they look like.
>> The petals.
>> How many petals does it have?
Is anybody's vision good
enough to count the petals?
>> 10?
>> So very good.
It looks like 10 petals,
but it's actually only 5,
but the petals are
very deeply cleft.
>> Oh, I see what you're saying.
>> Oh, yeah.
They're like double-cleft.
>> See what I mean?
So it's like a double petal.
The other thing
that chickweed has--
this is very hard to
explain, but you can see it--
is it has a mohawk hairline
on one side of the stem that
alternates in between leaves.
So if this is a section,
and then that's a section,
and below that leaf is another
section, there's a hairline.
It'll jump to opposite
sides of the stem.
>> Cool.
>> And it's a plant
that likes shade.
Look.
It's growing under a tree.
It's communicating
more information to us.
It likes shade, so this
beech is doing that for it.
And it likes to spread on grass.
This is like a wild sprout.
Super good raw in
sandwiches, wraps.
If you ever go to the
deli and get a sandwich,
if that's your
guilty pleasure, just
make sure you throw
some chickweed on it.
There's a lot of Christmas-like
trees in this world, right?
Can be very difficult
to tell them apart.
I'm going to give you a little
trick right here and now.
Pine needles are
long, generally, long.
Spruce needles kind of
almost look like mint stems.
They have four corners,
so you can spin them
in between your fingers.
If you can spin it,
it's probably a spruce.
If you can't spin it,
it'll be flat, it's a fir.
So now you just learned
all about conifers.
Long needles-- pine.
Short needles that kind of
look like pipe cleaners,
at first glance, could
either be spruce or fir.
And then you do the test.
It spins-- it's a spruce.
It doesn't spin-- it's a fir.
So this is your test over here.
Come over here.
We're going to do this at
least three times while we're
in the park.
Grab a needle.
I know it's kind of cheating
because that branch probably
fell off this tree.
What kind of tree is this?
>> Spruce.
>> This is a party
trick right here.
Next time you're hiking
with your friends,
just say, guess what?
This is a spruce.
All evergreens have
edible properties.
They actually also
concentrate vitamin C.
They're really good
for respiratory stuff.
So if you have any sort of
cough or phlegm going on,
the best thing to do for that is
to make a tea from the needles.
So you basically
get a pot, throw
a bunch of needles in
there, and then heat it up,
boil it for like two minutes.
Then let it cool so
that it's drinkable.
And pour yourself a nice little
glass of pine needle tea.
Kind of has a
Christmasy vibe to it,
but it has a really nice,
lemony characteristic.
And it's a great thing to
do when you're camping.
Like, if you want to engage
your kids, or your friends,
or your partners, next
time you go camping--
this is Sergei's
homework number two--
just harvest some either
spruce, or pine, or fir,
and make some trailside
tea for yourself.
>> Can you eat the spruce tips?
>> You can eat the spruce tips.
And you actually
beat me to the punch.
There's a tree that has them.
I'm glad that you
pointed that out.
The only caution
on evergreens is
if you're pregnant
or nursing, you
want to avoid them
because there's something
that small kids and
fetuses don't like.
So if you're
pregnant, avoid that.
Otherwise, they're completely
edible and beneficial.
We have a nice
little birch here.
And again, this is like a
survival food, in my opinion.
If I was starving to death,
I would come over here,
and I'd eat some of
the tender leaves.
These buds are a really
good food source.
This is a little
bit past its prime,
but these little guys, when
they're green, like baby corn.
You can boil it.
And so you can imagine if you've
got maybe a gallon of these,
that would be a pretty
substantial food source.
Again, the inner cambian
layer, the bark of the tree,
is edible.
But if you don't do it
right, you can kill the tree,
so I generally avoid that.
But birches are edible.
This is probably the most
pathetic miner's lettuce
specimen I've ever seen, but
because it's in the park,
I figured we'd talk about it.
I'll let you take a picture.
Look at how unique that looks.
>> It's really interesting.
>> So this is called a basal
rosette, this growth pattern.
Mustards do this too.
They kind of spread out.
It's not just one
stalk and leaves.
So everybody grab one of these.
Take one, pass it around.
Miner's lettuce is one of
the tastiest wild edibles.
This tastes like
butterhead lettuce.
And it also has lots
of vitamin C in it.
We used to do trade shows,
like health fairs and book
conventions.
And so at one of these
fairs, our neighbor
in the booth next to us,
he got on his high horse,
where he's like,
I'm going to make
Sergei eat some supplements.
And I have nothing
against supplements
other than that they try
and sell them to people
through fear-based tactics.
So this guy would
not let me alone.
He's like, you need
to try my supplement.
You're just not getting
enough nutrition in your diet.
And he had some
device that somehow
could calculate how
many antioxidants
were in your system.
And so finally,
he made me a deal.
He's like, I'll leave you
alone if you take my test.
And if I find that you're
lacking in antioxidants,
you have to try my supplement.
OK, whatever.
So he puts me through the test.
And his scale was
like 0 to 10,000.
I forget his unit
of measurement,
but it's not really important.
So as close to 10,000 is
ideal as possible, right?
When he measured
me, I had 50,000.
So I was literally
off his chart.
So then he was like, OK,
well, something went wrong.
So he tested me again.
Same result. He tested my mom.
She had 45,000.
My dad had the most.
He had 70.
And he was like, OK, wait,
what do you guys do again?
So then he was like, OK,
I'm prepared to listen.
So miner's lettuce is
really rich in antioxidants.
It's good to get as much
as we can in our diet.
And this will do it, as
well as all of the greens
that we've been talking about.
And so we've already
identified that it
grows in a basal rosette.
The key tell of miner's lettuce
is the disk-shaped leaves.
And then the stem goes directly
through the middle of the leaf.
>> It's a satellite dish.
Yeah, it's like a--
[BEEPING SOUNDS]
Pop quiz.
How do you identify
a true dandelion?
>> Smooth vein.
How do you identify a
miner's lettuce leaf?
>> It looks like
a satellite dish.
>> Looks like a satellite dish.
That's the right answer.
It has a disk leaf,
and then the stem
goes directly through the leaf.
How would I eat this?
This is a great
plant to eat raw.
It's kind of like spinach
if you try and cook it.
You need to get pounds of it,
and then when you cook it down,
it's going to go, whoop.
So more often than not, I would
just eat it raw in a salad.
It's really delicious.
You almost don't need
to do anything to it.
It tastes great.
And the reason they look
so puny and pathetic
here is because this
plant likes shade.
So it usually grows under
trees, on hillsides.
If you go to Chambers Bay--
where you never want to
harvest, because you don't want
to harvest from golf courses--
but if you do the loop, you'll
see that along the hillside,
there's tons of miner's lettuce.
And there's another
variety there
called Siberian
miner's lettuce, which
is a little bit different.
On we go.
Everybody grab one.
In fact, actually,
let's take this moment
to just chill for a second.
I know we're getting close,
but we have maybe three or four
more plants to look at.
So these are wild daisies.
And daisies are in
the sunflower family.
And a lot of sunflowers, we
already discerned, are edible.
There's almost 24,000
different varieties.
So these little ground daisies
are really good to eat raw.
In fact, actually, if
you find some leaves,
they're pretty hard to
get to under the grass,
but the leaves remind
me of arugula, almost.
They kind of have this
slightly skunky smell to them.
And so I would throw
the leaves in a salad.
I would throw the
flowers in a salad
because they're
beautiful, they're edible.
I would, again, take the
petals, and throw them
in an ice cube tray, and
make petal-infused ice.
Maybe while I was harvesting
dandelion greens and flowers,
I would take some
of these daisies,
and mix them with the
flowers, and throw them
in honey or maple syrup.
And that way, when it gets cold,
cloudy, and dreary in Tacoma,
I would go to make
a piece of toast,
and I would just spread some
of that jam on my toast,
and get a little boost of
vitamin D. It's literally
that simple.
And the other thing I want to
talk about since we're here
is clover.
So most lawns in the
world, at this point,
I've been to 66 countries,
and I can say with confidence
that in every country
that I've been to,
I've been able to
find clover on a lawn.
So most lawns have
clover on them.
Grab a clover leaf.
Clovers are in the pea family.
So they're like wild peas,
which is the first thing
that we talked about.
And peas have a lot
of protein in them.
And they also have B vitamins--
B1, B2, B3, B6, B12.
They also have phosphorus.
I believe magnesium,
manganese, and zinc.
So they're very, very
nutritious and delicious.
You could just take
this little leaf
and throw it in
your soup, salad.
Cook it.
Eat it raw.
I like smoothies,
personally, because I
feel like that's the easiest
way to get greens in our diet.
It's funny.
One of my comments on my
book on Amazon, some guy
went through my book and counted
how many times I say smoothie.
And I think I say it 250 times.
And he's like, I didn't
realize how much this guy likes
smoothies.
But the only reason I do is
because it's just an easy way
to get greens in our diet.
You just wake up, make
a smoothie for yourself.
And that ensures
that you're going
to get at least two salads in
smoothie form in your diet.
So this is a great thing
to do in smoothies.
Let's talk about how
to identify this thing.
So all peas have three leaves.
Unless you're lucky,
then they have four.
Clover has four, sometimes.
And we call that a
four-leaf clover.
Did you know that a
four-leaf clover is actually
more nutritious than
a three-leaf clover?
It's 25% more nutritious.
Another identifying
characteristic of clover
is that the leaf has a
crescent-shaped little white
part on it.
>> Wow, it's beautiful.
>> It's beautiful, right?
OK, now take the leaf
really close and personal,
and look at the edges,
and tell me what you see.
>> It's jagged all around.
>> It's jagged.
It almost looks like it has
tiny little spines on it.
Those are great identifying
characteristics.
It's literally that easy.
Right now, what
you're doing is you're
building your search
image of clover.
We're spending time with
these plants intimately,
and you don't even realize,
maybe fully, right now,
what you're doing.
But later on, you go home,
or in a month, in a year,
you're going to be sitting
in a park with your friends,
having a picnic.
And your hand is going to wander
because you get a little bored.
And you're going to
pick up a clover,
and you're going to be like,
huh, three leaves, oval,
clover.
And that means I did my
job somewhat correctly.
OK, on we go.
A few more, and then
we're going to head home,
answer some questions.
And anybody that
needs to go can go.
What kind of tree is this?
>> Pine.
>> How do we know?
>> Long needles.
A fun fact about pines.
>> Whoa.
>> Aw, this ruined my surprise.
So another way to identify
pines is they always
either have two or five needles.
So they're going to be long.
And then they're either going
to have two or five needles.
And again, you can make
tea from these needles.
Just boil these down.
But what I'm here to
look at today is this.
>> Wow.
>> That's pine pollen.
So if you're allergic to pollen,
probably not the best edible
for you.
But if you're not allergic to
pollen, this is pure protein.
This is amino acids.
So how you would harvest
this is you put a plastic bag
over this, and you just shake.
Or you can literally just
take these, and just eat them,
or throw them in a
smoothie, or a soup.
If you're making
some pizza, you could
put some of that in the dough.
Get creative.
And that stuff's
really nutritious.
The other thing I want to
show you while you're here
is this plant that
grows underneath it.
Let's all grab one of these.
We'll get some more.
Grab one, pass it around.
>> Thank you.
>> Neato.
>> OK, this is another one
of those plants that we can
identify much easier
by smell than sight.
So crush this up, and tell
me what this smells like.
>> I could almost smell it.
>> Really?
>> Yeah.
>> Wintergreen or
something like that.
>> Oh, that smells good.
>> So this is called yarrow.
And yarrow develops a very
big umbrella-like flower
in late summer.
Sometimes, it's white.
Sometimes, it's yellow.
Sometimes, it's pink.
And yarrow is another sleep aid.
So if you have
problems with insomnia,
if you just have trouble
falling asleep at night,
you could take some
of that wild chamomile
that we learned about, you could
take some of those daisies,
and you could take some yarrow,
which smells very sweet,
almost makes you salivate.
You could dry it,
put it in a tea.
And now you have a
foraged sleep aid.
Pretty cool, huh?
The other thing that's
nice about yarrow
is if you ever cut yourself,
and you're in the woods,
you can literally press
this into your wound
because it has antiseptic,
antibacterial properties.
In fact, Vikings
used to use this.
They would actually fill
their wounds with it
when they got battle wounds.
Native Americans
did similar stuff.
One time, when I was on the
trail, I cut through my palm
while trying to cut
a piece of fruit
that we had in our backpack.
And obviously, I was 50
miles away from a hospital,
so there was no way that
I could stitch it up.
But what I actually
took is rose petals,
because they're
natural bandages,
and then I would alternate
that with yarrow.
And you can look
at my palm later,
but there's almost no scar.
It's sealed up really nicely.
Wild edibles can literally
save your life sometimes,
and this is another
one of those.
What kind of tree is this?
>> Fir.
>> What kind of tree is this?
>> How do we know?
>> It's flat.
>> It does not roll.
>> It does not roll
around in your--
>> Flat.
>> Flat needles.
It's a fir.
OK, on we go.
Boys and girls, what
kind of tree is this?
>> Fir.
>> How do we know?
>> Flat.
>> No rolling.
>> OK, who thinks spruce?
Raise your hand.
Who thinks fir?
>> Fir.
>> OK, you're right.
It's a fir.
OK, on this one,
let's also point out
the bright, little, green tips.
Who was talking
about those earlier?
You were.
So these are awesome eating.
These are like the
springtime green tips,
and they taste like lemon.
Yeah.
So these parts you throw
straight into salads.
They concentrate
vitamin C. They're
good for your respiratory.
They get phlegm
out of your system.
You can pickle them.
So in the springtime, now,
I've come through here
with a little bowl, and
I just start taking them.
And before long, I'd have
enough to really make a meal of.
You can also use these
in tea, but they're not
quite-- these are the
meristematic bits of the fir,
so they're not going
to be as fragrant.
I think for tea, you use
the more mature ones.
And then for eating,
for salads, you
use the more nutritious,
more delicious bits,
which is the meristematic bits.
OK, what kind of tree is this?
>> Spruce.
>> Who said spruce?
I'm going to pick on you.
Come over here.
Grab a needle.
And this is actually
a good example.
So the last pine
had two needles.
This pine has five needles.
Count them up.
This will be the
last one right here.
>> I don't know.
>> Yeah, right.
>> No.
Don't believe it.
>> Oh, sweet.
>> OK, take a leaf,
pass it around.
Here, we'll do this.
Take one, pass it around.
First, we're going
to do the test.
Flip it over.
Is this a dandelion?
>> Probably not.
>> It's smooth.
>> It's not that smooth.
>> It looks like it.
Yeah.
>> Slimier.
>> How do we know that
it's not a dandelion?
>> It's not smooth.
>> It's hairy.
Good job.
So this, in fact,
is not a dandelion.
It's a dandelion relative.
And this is called cat's ears,
probably because it kind of
looks like a little cat ear.
It's perfectly edible.
It has similar
properties to dandelion,
which is that it's good for your
inner organs, your gallbladder,
pancreas, liver, kidneys.
Because it's fuzzy, this one is
a better green to eat cooked.
It's much more pleasant.
So again, you throw it in
soups, in pastas, stir fry.
This is a great
green for stir fries.
How else?
You could bake it.
You could put it in lasagna.
You could do whatever the
heck you want with it.
But this is a great green,
and it's literally everywhere
into Tacoma.
And the other identifying
characteristic
is it will develop
yellow flowers, kind
of like a dandelion.
But a dandelion has
one flower per stem,
and cat's ears will have
multiple yellow flowers
per stem.
OK, so I promised this
will be the last one.
This will be the last one.
Let's head back to Expand.
If anybody wants to buy a
book, I have a couple of those.
Otherwise, I'll
answer questions.
And if people need
to go, they can go.
Or we can linger for a little
bit and talk more about plants.